.\" Copyright (c) 2026 PeakAIO
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH MDS-ADMIN 8 "2026-05-02" "pnfs-mds 0.1.1" "pnfs-mds Administrator Manual"
.SH NAME
mds-admin \- administer a running pnfs-mds daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mds-admin
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-V | \-\-version ]
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ arguments ...]
.RB [ \-\-mds-host
.IR host ]
.RB [ \-\-mds-port
.IR port ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mds-admin
is the command-line interface for operating a live
.BR pnfs-mds (8)
daemon.  It talks to the daemon over the cluster-transport admin socket
and exposes commands for inspecting and mutating cluster membership,
subtree ownership, data-server registration and weights, quotas,
tiering, backup, online upgrade, and runtime configuration.
.PP
Every command operates on a single daemon endpoint selected by
.B \-\-mds-host
and
.B \-\-mds-port
(see
.BR "GLOBAL OPTIONS" ).
No command mutates the on-disk catalogue directly; all changes are
routed through the daemon so that RonDB consistency, catalogue
locking, and peer notifications are honoured.
.PP
The daemon enforces a peer allow-list on its admin socket.  When TLS
is not enabled, only callers whose source address is
.I 127.0.0.1
or appears in the daemon's
.I cluster_peer[]
config are accepted; run
.B mds-admin
on one of the MDS hosts and point
.B \-\-mds-host
at the daemon's
.I cluster_bind_addr
(typically the internal pNFS IP) when administering remotely.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print the full usage summary and exit 0.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the tool's build version and exit 0.
.TP
.BI \-\-mds-host " host"
Admin target hostname or IP.  Default
.IR 127.0.0.1 .
Every subcommand accepts this flag.
.TP
.BI \-\-mds-port " port"
Admin TCP port.  Default
.I 9800
for legacy gRPC-era commands.  The C1\(enC3 commands added in 2026
(\fBconfig show\fR, \fBds capacity show\fR, \fBds capacity probe-now\fR,
\fBds set-weight\fR) share the daemon's cluster-transport port
(\fIgrpc_port\fR in
.IR mds.conf (5),
default
.IR 50051 ).
In lab deployments use
.BI \-\-mds-port " 50051"
for those commands.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Request machine-readable JSON output.  Supported by commands that
produce listings (\fBsubtree list\fR, \fBds list\fR, \fBds capacity show\fR,
\fBconfig show\fR, \fBstatus\fR, \fBmetrics\fR, \fBtier status\fR,
\fBresilver status\fR, \fBrebalance status\fR, \fBquota report\fR,
\fBcluster status\fR, \fBmigration progress\fR, \fBupgrade status\fR,
\fBbackup info\fR).  Ignored by mutation commands.
.SH COMMANDS
Commands are grouped by subsystem.  Positional arguments are shown in
angle brackets (\fI<id>\fR); bracketed \fB[\-\-flag]\fR tokens are
optional.
.SS "Cluster health and metrics"
.TP
.B status
Compact health summary (active MDSes, DS online/offline counts, grace
state, layout-recall backlog).  With
.B \-\-json
returns a structured object.
.TP
.B metrics
Print the daemon's Prometheus exposition block (same content served on
.I metrics_http_port
over HTTP, fetched over the admin socket for hosts that can't reach
the HTTP endpoint).
.TP
.B cluster status
Cluster-wide view of peer liveness, owner_epoch, and fencing state.
.TP
.B migration progress
Per-in-flight-subtree migration progress: source, destination,
phase, bytes/ops moved.
.SS "Subtree ownership"
.TP
.B subtree list \fR[\fB\-\-owner\fR \fI<mds_id>\fR]
List every subtree entry with path, owner, state (ACTIVE / MIGRATING /
FROZEN / DRAINING), op counter, and version.  The optional owner
filter restricts to subtrees owned by a given MDS.
.TP
.B subtree owned \fI<mds_id>\fR
Shorthand for \fBsubtree list \-\-owner \fI<mds_id>\fR.
.TP
.B subtree migrate \fI<path> <dest_mds_id>\fR \fR[\fB\-\-host\fR \fIh\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-port\fR \fIp\fR]
Initiate a migration of
.I <path>
to
.I <dest_mds_id>
via the daemon.  The optional
.BR \-\-host / \-\-port
override the destination endpoint (default is taken from the subtree
map).
.TP
.B subtree split \fI<parent> <child> <dest_mds_id>\fR \fR[\fB\-\-host\fR \fIh\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-port\fR \fIp\fR]
Split
.I <child>
out of the subtree that contains
.I <parent>
and assign it to
.IR <dest_mds_id> .
.TP
.B subtree assign \fI<path> <dest_mds_id>\fR \fR[\fB\-\-host\fR \fIh\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-port\fR \fIp\fR]
Reassign the subtree rooted at
.I <path>
without moving data; requires the subtree to be empty or already on
the destination.
.SS "MDS node lifecycle"
.TP
.B node join \fI<mds_id> <hostname>\fR \fR[\fB\-\-nfs-port\fR \fIN\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-grpc-port\fR \fIN\fR]
Register a new MDS node with the cluster.
.TP
.B node leave \fI<mds_id>\fR
Gracefully remove a node after draining.
.TP
.B node drain \fI<mds_id>\fR
Stop new client bindings and start shedding subtrees off
.IR <mds_id> .
.TP
.B node undrain \fI<mds_id>\fR
Reverse a
.B node drain .
.TP
.B node detach \fI<mds_id>\fR
Remove a node that is known-dead without waiting for drain.
.TP
.B node force-remove \fI<mds_id>\fR
Emergency removal: drops the node's entries from the membership table
without fencing or drain.  Use only when
.B node detach
fails and the target is verified offline.
.TP
.B node set-lifecycle \fI<mds_id> <state>\fR
Manually set the lifecycle state of
.IR <mds_id>
(\fBactive\fR, \fBstandby\fR, \fBdraining\fR, \fBdetached\fR).
.TP
.B standby attach \fI<mds_id> <hostname>\fR \fR[...]
Register a standby replica for
.IR <mds_id> .
Additional arguments are forwarded to the daemon's attach handler.
.SS "Data servers"
.TP
.B ds list
Registered DS table: id, host, port, state, mode, transport, tier,
export path.
.TP
.B ds add \fI<ds_id> <host> <port>\fR \fR[\fB\-\-tier\fR \fIN\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-mode generic\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-transport\fR \fItcp\fR|\fIrdma\fR|\fItcp,rdma\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-export-path\fR \fI/path\fR]
Add a new DS entry to the registry.  The daemon then probes the DS on
the next heartbeat interval.
.TP
.B ds set-state \fI<ds_id> <state>\fR
Force a DS state.  Valid states:
.BR online ", " offline ", " draining ", " rebalancing .
.TP
.B ds remove \fI<ds_id>\fR
Remove a DS from the registry.  Rejects if a live layout points at it.
.TP
.B ds validate \fI<ds_id>\fR \fR[\fB\-\-tool-version\fR \fIs\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-note\fR \fIs\fR]
Mark a DS as operator-validated; stored as metadata in the registry
row.
.TP
.B ds validate-clear \fI<ds_id>\fR
Clear the validated flag.
.TP
.B ds validate-info \fI<ds_id>\fR
Show the validation metadata for
.IR <ds_id> .
.TP
.B ds set-weight \fI<ds_id> <weight>\fR
Set the runtime WRR weight for
.I <ds_id>
(uint32).  Applied in the daemon's DS cache immediately; does not
write the INI.  Persist by adding
.BI ds_weight. <ds_id> = <weight>
to
.IR mds.conf (5).
Requires
.BI \-\-mds-port " 50051"
(cluster-transport port) in a default deployment.
.TP
.B ds capacity show
List statvfs-backed capacity for every DS: state, total, used,
available, operator weight, and capacity-derived auto-weight.  The
.B AUTO
column is populated by the background statvfs probe when
.I placement_capacity_weighting
is
.BR proportional
in
.IR mds.conf (5);
it is zero when the feature is off or no successful probe has run
yet.  Effective WRR weight is
.B AUTO
only when the operator
.B WEIGHT
column is zero.  Updated on the
.I ds_capacity_poll_ms
cadence; see
.B ds capacity probe-now
for an on-demand refresh.  Supports
.BR \-\-json .
.TP
.B ds capacity probe-now
Force an immediate statvfs sweep of every mounted DS.  Response
reports the number of DSes probed.  Uses the cluster-transport port.
.TP
.B ds import \fI<ds_id> <source_dir>\fR \fB\-\-db\fR \fIPATH\fR \fB\-\-ds-mount\fR \fIPATH\fR \fR[\fB\-\-target-dir\fR \fI/path\fR]
.TQ
.B ds reattach \fI<ds_id>\fR \fB\-\-db\fR \fIPATH\fR \fB\-\-ds-mount\fR \fIPATH\fR
.TQ
.B ds scan \fI<ds_id>\fR \fB\-\-db\fR \fIPATH\fR \fB\-\-ds-mount\fR \fIPATH\fR \fR[\fB\-\-repair\fR]
Offline DS onboarding / repair subcommands.  These are deprecated in
the RonDB era and return an error on current builds; retained for
backward compatibility with legacy tooling.
.SS "Resilvering and rebalancing"
.TP
.B resilver start \fI<ds_id>\fR
Start a full resilver of
.I <ds_id>
against its mirror peers.
.TP
.B resilver status \fR[\fI<ds_id>\fR]
Show the in-flight resilver state, either globally or for a single
DS.
.TP
.B rebalance start \fI<source_ds> <target_ds>\fR
Move a balanced fraction of layout records from source to target.
.TP
.B rebalance status
Show the current rebalance job's progress.
.SS "Tiering"
.TP
.B tier start \fR[\fB\-\-interval\fR \fISEC\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-promote-thresh\fR \fIN\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-demote-thresh\fR \fIN\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-cooldown\fR \fIN\fR]
Enable the tiering scanner with the given thresholds.
.TP
.B tier stop
Disable tiering.
.TP
.B tier status
Report the tiering scanner's state and last decision counts.
.SS "Quotas"
.TP
.B quota set \fI<scope_type> <scope_id> <max_bytes> <max_inodes>\fR
Create or update a quota rule.
.I scope_type
is
.B uid
or
.BR gid .
.TP
.B quota report \fI<scope_type> <scope_id>\fR
Report current usage and limits for the given scope.
.TP
.B quota del \fI<scope_type> <scope_id>\fR
Delete a quota rule.
.SS "Backup"
.TP
.B backup create \fI<path>\fR
Start a catalogue snapshot to
.IR <path> .
.TP
.B backup verify \fI<path>\fR
Verify the structural integrity of a snapshot.
.TP
.B backup info \fI<path>\fR
Print the snapshot's header and size.
.TP
.B backup restore \fI<path>\fR
Restore the catalogue from
.IR <path> .
Daemon must be in a quiesced state.
.SS "Online upgrade"
.TP
.B upgrade failover \fI<target_mds_id>\fR
Hand control to
.I <target_mds_id>
so this node can be upgraded.
.TP
.B upgrade status
Show in-flight upgrade state.
.SS "Runtime configuration (C1\(enC3)"
.TP
.B config show \fR[\fI<key>\fR]
Dump the daemon's live
.IR mds.conf (5)
in INI
.IR key = value
form.  With a positional
.I <key>
argument, restrict output to that key.  With
.B \-\-json
emit an object.  Requires
.BI \-\-mds-port " 50051" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
Command failed.  A diagnostic is written to
.IR stderr ;
common causes include an unreachable daemon, an invalid argument,
rejection by the peer allow-list, or a catalogue-level error.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
No environment variables are consumed.  All configuration is supplied
via command-line flags.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/pnfs-mds/mds.conf
INI file driving the daemon; mds-admin does not read it, but every
.B config show
key and every default port comes from it.  See
.IR mds.conf (5).
.TP
.I /etc/pnfs-mds/rondb.conf
RonDB connect string and schema name.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Inspect the live cluster from the local MDS host:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
mds-admin status
mds-admin subtree list
mds-admin ds list
mds-admin metrics | head -40
.fi
.RE
.PP
Administer a remote MDS over its cluster-transport port:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
mds-admin ds capacity show --mds-host 10.0.0.101 --mds-port 50051
mds-admin ds set-weight 0 250 --mds-host 10.0.0.101 --mds-port 50051
mds-admin ds capacity probe-now --mds-host 10.0.0.101 --mds-port 50051
mds-admin config show metrics_http_port --mds-host 10.0.0.101 --mds-port 50051
.fi
.RE
.PP
Drain an MDS before maintenance:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
mds-admin node drain 2
mds-admin subtree list --owner 2        # wait until empty
mds-admin node leave 2
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pnfs-mds (8),
.BR mds.conf (5),
.BR nfs (5),
.BR exportfs (8),
.BR statvfs (3),
.BR ndb_mgm (1).
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2026 PeakAIO.  Licensed under MIT.  See
.B LICENSE-MIT
in the source distribution.
