.\" Copyright (c) 2026 PeakAIO
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH MDS.CONF 5 "2026-05-02" "pnfs-mds 0.1.1" "pnfs-mds Administrator Manual"
.SH NAME
mds.conf \- pnfs-mds runtime configuration file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/pnfs-mds/mds.conf
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I mds.conf
is the INI-style configuration file read by
.BR pnfs-mds (8)
at startup via
.BR mds_config_load() .
Each line is either blank, a comment (leading
.B #
or
.BR ; ),
or a
.IR key " = " value
assignment.  Whitespace around
.B =
and inside the
.I value
is trimmed.  Unknown keys are ignored with a
.B WARN:
line on
.IR stderr ;
values that fail validation are logged and the compiled-in default is
retained.
.PP
Most keys take effect only at daemon start.  A small set of keys is
adjustable at runtime via
.BR mds-admin (8);
those are noted below with
.BR "live:" .
.PP
Operator-tunable DS geometry and placement-policy weights that are not
yet parsed from this file can still be inspected and set at runtime
with
.BR "mds-admin config show" ,
.BR "mds-admin ds capacity show" ,
and
.BR "mds-admin ds set-weight" .
.SH FILE FORMAT
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
# Comment
key = value
list[0] = entry
list[1] = entry
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Types
.TP
.B bool
.BR true / false ,
.BR yes / no ,
.BR 1 / 0 .
.TP
.B uint / int
Decimal integer.
.TP
.B string
Unquoted token; trailing whitespace is stripped.  Quotes are not
special.
.TP
.B path
Absolute filesystem path.  Not expanded; no
.B ~
or
.BR $VAR .
.TP
.B enum
One of an explicit set listed with each key.
.SH KEYS
Keys are grouped by subsystem.  Defaults in parentheses.
.SS "Identity and cluster membership"
.TP
.B mds_id
.IR uint ,
range
.IR "1..UINT32_MAX"
(default
.BR 1 ).
Unique node id.  Must be unique across the cluster.
.TP
.B hostname
.I string
(default
.BR localhost ).
This node's advertised network name.
.TP
.B nfs_port
.IR uint ,
range
.IR "1..65535"
(default
.BR 2049 ).
Port for the NFSv4.1 listener.
.TP
.B grpc_port
.IR uint ,
range
.IR "1..65535"
(default
.BR 50051 ).
Cluster-transport listener (used for inter-MDS RPCs and for
.BR mds-admin (8)'s
C1\(enC3 commands).
.TP
.B cluster_size
.IR uint .
Expected number of MDS nodes.  Informational; used by
.BR pnfs-mds (8)
to seed
.I /shardN
partitions on first boot.
.TP
.B cluster_bind_addr
.IR string
(default
.BR 127.0.0.1 ).
Address to bind
.I grpc_port
on.  Should be the internal pNFS interface.
.TP
.B cluster_max_conns
.IR uint ,
range
.IR "1..256"
(default
.BR 16 ).
Peer connection ceiling.
.TP
.BI cluster_peer[ N ]
.IR string .
Peer allow-list entry at index
.IR N .
Must be set for every remote MDS that will talk to this node.
.TP
.BR cluster_ca_file ", " node_cert_file ", " node_key_file
.IR path .
X.509 material for mTLS on the cluster transport.
.TP
.B require_mtls
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Require peer mTLS on
.IR grpc_port .
When
.BR true ,
the peer allow-list is enforced by certificate SAN rather than source
address.
.SS "Catalogue"
.TP
.B catalogue_backend
.I enum
.RI ( rondb )
(default
.BR rondb ).
Only
.B rondb
is supported on current builds.
.TP
.B catalogue_backend_conf
.IR path .
Backend-specific config file, e.g.
.IR /etc/pnfs-mds/rondb.conf .
.TP
.B catalog_image_mode
.I enum
.RI ( off | shadow | compare | primary )
(default
.BR off ).
Image-layer replay mode.
.TP
.B catalog_compare_reads
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Enable image-vs-authority compare reads.
.TP
.B catalog_replay_mode
.I enum
.RI ( off | log | journal )
(default
.BR off ).
.TP
.B catalog_replay_snapshot_path
.IR path .
.TP
.B catalog_replay_rebuild_on_start
.IR bool .
.TP
.B catalog_delta_log_path
.IR path .
.TP
.B ndb_conn_pool_size
.IR uint ,
range
.I "1..32"
(default: auto-sized from worker count).
NDB connections per MDS.
.TP
.B ndb_async_writes
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Use the async NDB batch pipeline for hot write paths.
.TP
.B transient_state_cache
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Skip NDB write-through for open/layout state.  Turn on for single-MDS
lab performance at the cost of in-memory-only open/layout state.
.SS "Replication and failover"
.TP
.B repl_mode
.I enum
.RI ( sync | async | semi_sync ).
.TP
.BR standby_host ", " standby_port
.IR string / uint .
Standby target endpoint.
.TP
.B repl_listen_port
.I uint
(default
.BR 9401 ).
Port for incoming replica traffic.
.TP
.B repl_semi_sync_n
.IR uint .
Minimum acks required for
.BR semi_sync .
.TP
.B repl_health_interval_ms
.IR uint .
.TP
.B repl_refuse_writes_on_resync
.IR bool .
.TP
.B self_role
.I enum
.RI ( 0 =ACTIVE,\  1 =STANDBY).
.TP
.B self_failover_partner_id
.IR uint .
Paired partner
.IR mds_id .
.SS "Workload and tuning"
.TP
.B workload_profile
.I enum
.RI ( default | hpc | ai_training | genomics | media ).
Applies a curated set of tuning defaults.
.TP
.B worker_threads
.I uint
(default
.BR 16 ).
COMPOUND dispatch thread count.
.TP
.B max_inflight_per_conn
.IR uint ,
range
.I "1..1024"
(default
.BR 8 ).
Maximum COMPOUND requests processed concurrently per TCP connection
(bounded request pipelining).  Larger values let a client with few
connections but many NFSv4.1 session slots use more of the worker pool;
the cost is up to this many in-flight request buffers per connection.
.TP
.B stripe_unit_bytes
.I uint
(default
.BR 65536 ).
Default stripe unit for new layouts.
.TP
.BR default_stripe_count ", " default_mirror_count
.I uint
(default
.BR 1 / 1 ).
Default geometry for new files.
.TP
.BR lease_time_sec ", " grace_period_sec
.IR uint .
NFSv4 lease duration and server grace period.
.TP
.B prealloc_pool_size
.I uint
(default
.BR 4096 ).
DS pre-alloc pool size.
.TP
.B gpudirect_required
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Reject I/O from clients lacking GPUDirect support.
.TP
.B inline_enabled
.I bool
(default
.BR true ).
Enable inline-data acceleration.
.TP
.B inline_max_size
.IR uint ,
range
.I "1..65536"
(default
.BR 65536 ).
Maximum bytes stored inline per file.
.SS "Commit pipeline"
.TP
.BR CommitBatchSize ", " CommitBatchMaxBytes ", " CommitFlushMs ", " CommitQueueDepth
.IR uint .
Single-writer batch-commit knobs.  Camel-case preserved for backward
compatibility.
.SS "Caches"
.TP
.B inode_cache_size
.IR uint ,
range
.I "0..1000000"
(default
.BR 0 ,
disabled).
Entries in the in-memory inode cache.  Set to e.g.
.BR 16384
to enable the previous lab default.
.TP
.B dirent_cache_size
.IR uint ,
range
.I "0..1000000"
(default
.BR 32768 ).
Entries in the dirent cache.
.TP
.B negative_cache_ttl_ms
.IR uint ,
range
.I "0..3600000"
(default
.BR 5000 ).
TTL for cached negative-lookup entries.
.SS "Data servers"
.TP
.B ds_count
.IR uint .
Number of configured DS entries; must match the populated
.BI ds[ N ]
indices.
.TP
.BI ds[ N ]
.IR string .
DS spec at index
.IR N ,
formatted
.BI host :/ export
(e.g.
.IR 10.0.0.103:/export/ds ).
.TP
.B ds_mount_path_fmt
.I string
(default
.BR /mnt/ds%u ).
printf format with exactly one
.B %u
for DS mount paths.
.TP
.B ds_heartbeat_ms
.I uint
(default
.BR 5000 ).
DS probe interval.
.TP
.B ds_health_fail_threshold
.IR uint ,
range
.I "1..1024"
(default
.BR 6 ).
Consecutive probe failures before a DS is marked OFFLINE.
.TP
.BI ds_weight. <id>
.I uint32
(default
.BR 0 ).
Per-DS WRR weight.
.B 0
means "unset" \(em the placement path falls back to free-bytes.
.BR "live:"
settable with
.BR "mds-admin ds set-weight" .
.TP
.B ds_capacity_poll_ms
.IR uint ,
range
.I "0..86400000"
(default
.BR 60000 ).
statvfs() sweep interval.
.B 0
disables the background sweep;
.BR "mds-admin ds capacity probe-now"
still forces an on-demand sweep.
.TP
.B ds_gc_workers
.IR uint ,
range
.I "1..32"
(default
.BR 4 ).
Number of worker threads draining the catalogue GC queue.  One
coordinator thread batch-peeks GC entries via the RonDB shim and
stages them in a bounded queue; the workers pop one entry at a time
and run the per-DS unlink sweep.  Setting this to
.B 1
reproduces the historical serial drainer while still benefiting from
the batched peek.
.TP
.B ds_gc_batch_size
.IR uint ,
range
.I "1..4096"
(default
.BR 256 ).
Maximum entries fetched per coordinator tick.  Sizes the bounded
queue between the coordinator and the workers; larger values
amortise the gc_peek scan over more entries at the cost of a longer
stop-drain window.
.TP
.B ds_prepare_queue_depth
.IR uint ,
range
.IR "0..65536" .
.TP
.B ds_prepare_workers
.IR uint ,
range
.IR "0..64" .
.SS "Placement"
.TP
.B placement_policy
.I enum
.RI ( rr | wrr | weighted_rr | capacity )
(default
.BR rr ).
.TP
.B placement_policy_enabled
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Master switch for the placement-policy dispatcher.
.TP
.B placement_capacity_weighting
.I enum
.RI ( off | proportional )
(default
.BR off ).
Derive per-DS WRR weights from the
.I statvfs
capacity probe.  Under
.BR proportional ,
each probe cycle stamps
.BI auto_weight " = max(1, floor((1 \(mi used/total) \(mu 100))"
onto the DS cache entry; the value is clamped into
.IR [1,\ 100] .
Overlay precedence in the placement path becomes
.IR ds_weight. <id>
(operator override)
>
.I auto_weight
>
free-bytes heuristic
>
uniform.  Operators who want sharper skew can still layer
.BI ds_weight. <id>
on top \(em the capacity-derived value is only consulted when the
operator weight is zero.  The rebalance scanner reads the same
signal via
.BR "mds-admin ds capacity show" .
.BR "live:"
applies on the next probe cycle after the daemon re-reads the
config; for immediate effect use
.BR "mds-admin ds capacity probe-now" .
.SS "HPC-Shared (N-to-1) tuning"
.TP
.B hpc_max_stripe_count
.IR uint ,
range
.I "1..1024"
(default
.BR 128 ).
Wide-stripe ceiling for HPC-Shared CREATEs.  Caps
.I stripe_count
regardless of how many ONLINE DSes the cluster has.  Raise up to
.B 1024
for >128-DS clusters validated against the wide-stripe wire-buffer
path.  Out-of-range values are rejected at parse time so a typo
cannot silently degrade to a 1-DS layout.
.TP
.B hpc_xdr_form
.I enum
.RI ( auto | legacy | striped )
(default
.BR auto ).
Flex-files layout XDR wire form for HPC-Shared inodes.
.B auto
emits the multi-DS-per-mirror form for HPC-Shared inodes whose
layout has
.IR mirror_count " == 1 "
and
.IR stripe_count " > 1"
\(em all other inodes (plain files, mirrored layouts) keep the
legacy one-DS-per-mirror form so existing clients see bit-for-bit
identical wire output.
.B legacy
forces one-DS-per-mirror unconditionally; useful for operators with
pre-6.18 Linux clients in the fleet.
.B striped
forces multi-DS-per-mirror unconditionally; use only on fleets
confirmed to be 6.18+ across the board.  Unknown values are
rejected at parse time.
.SS "Authentication"
.TP
.B nfs_auth_mode
.I enum
.RI ( sys | krb5 | krb5i | krb5p ).
.TP
.BR krb5_keytab ", " krb5_principal
.IR path / string .
GSS credentials for
.BR krb5* .
.SS "Directory delegations"
.TP
.B dir_delegations_enabled
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Master switch for
.BR OP_GET_DIR_DELEGATION
grants.  When disabled the server returns an inner
.B GDD4_UNAVAIL
while keeping the outer compound status
.B NFS4_OK
so client compounds that bundle a trailing GETATTR still complete.
.TP
.B dir_deleg_recall_timeout_ms
.IR uint ,
range
.I "50..300000"
(default
.BR 5000 ).
Default CB_RECALL / CB_NOTIFY timeout for dir delegations; scales the
in-flight dedupe window.
.SS "Callback channel"
.TP
.B cb_recall_timeout_ms
.IR uint ,
range
.I "50..300000"
(default
.BR 5000 ).
Default CB_RECALL / CB_LAYOUTRECALL / CB_NOTIFY timeout when callers
pass 0.
.SS "Observability"
.TP
.B metrics_http_port
.IR uint ,
range
.I "0..65535"
(default
.BR 9090 ).
Prometheus scrape port.
.B 0
disables the HTTP endpoint.
.SS "showmount -e compatibility (mountd_compat)"
The MDS speaks NFSv4.1 / pNFS only and does not implement NFSv3
MOUNT.  When the keys below are enabled, the daemon spawns a tiny
ONC-RPC responder for program 100005 (mountd) version 3 that
answers
.B NULL ,
.B EXPORT ,
and
.B DUMP
with a synthetic, MDS-defined export list.  Every other procedure
\(em including
.BR MNT \(em
is rejected with
.BR PROC_UNAVAIL ,
so the MDS cannot be NFSv3-mounted through this shim.  No DS
interaction.  See
.BR /usr/share/doc/pnfs-mds/mountd-compat.md
for the full design and threat model.
.TP
.B mountd_compat_enabled
.I bool
(default
.BR true ).
Master switch.  Enabled by default so a fresh install satisfies
.B showmount -e <mds>
out-of-the-box.  Set to
.B false
to suppress the listener entirely (no port bound, no rpcbind entry).
Note: on upgrade, an existing deployment will start binding
.B 20048
and registering with rpcbind on first restart \(em see CHANGELOG.
.TP
.B mountd_compat_port
.IR uint ,
range
.I "0..65535"
(default
.BR 20048 ).
UDP+TCP port to bind.
.B 0
lets the OS pick an ephemeral port.
.TP
.B mountd_compat_bind_addr
.I ipv4-string
(default
.BR 0.0.0.0 ).
Bind address.
.TP
.B mountd_compat_register_rpcbind
.I bool
(default
.BR true ).
Register
.B 100005/3
\(rA
.I port
with the local rpcbind at startup so
.B showmount -e
can discover the port via portmap on 111.  Requires
.BR rpcbind
running on the host; failure to register is logged and does not
fail startup.
.TP
.B mountd_compat_exports
.IR "comma-separated list" ,
up to 16 entries, each
.IR "\(<= 255 bytes"
(default
.BR / ).
Synthetic export paths to advertise on
.BR EXPORT .
These strings are advisory; they do not need to map to any real
filesystem path on the MDS or any DS.  Example:
.RS 4
.nf
mountd_compat_exports = /pnfs, /scratch
.fi
.RE
.SS "Access control"
.TP
.B posix_dac
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
When enabled, enforce POSIX permission semantics for
.B AUTH_SYS
requests: owner-only
.BR chmod / chown / utimes ,
directory write+search bits for namespace mutations
(CREATE/REMOVE/RENAME/LINK/OPEN-create), search bits on LOOKUP, the
.B S_ISVTX
sticky-deletion rule, root-only device-node creation, and SUID/SGID
clearing on chown, truncate, and write.
.B uid 0
bypasses the permission gates (there is no root squash).  Setting
.B false
restores the historical permissive behaviour where any principal
could mutate any object \(em only sensible on fully-trusted
single-user clusters.  Requests authenticated with flavors other
than AUTH_SYS (AUTH_NONE, RPCSEC_GSS) are not subject to these
checks.
.SS "Auto-split"
.TP
.B auto_split_enabled
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
.TP
.B auto_split_execute
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
.TP
.B auto_split_threshold
.I uint
(default
.BR 10000 ).
Ops per interval to propose a split.
.TP
.B auto_split_interval
.I uint
(default
.BR 300
seconds).
Evaluation cadence.
.TP
.B auto_split_cooldown
.I uint
(default
.BR 600
seconds).
Minimum seconds between re-splits of the same parent.
.TP
.B auto_split_sustained
.I uint
(default
.BR 2 ).
Consecutive hot intervals required before acting.
.TP
.B auto_split_min_children
.I uint
(default
.BR 4 ).
Minimum children eligible for a split.
.SS "Sharding"
.TP
.B shard_enabled
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Master switch for the shard router.
.TP
.B hide_referral_junctions
.I bool
(default
.BR false ).
Cosmetic.  When
.BR true ,
the
.I /shardN
referral junction directories are omitted from
.B READDIR
replies at the namespace root only.
.B LOOKUP
still resolves them, so
.I cd /mnt/pnfs/shardN
keeps working; this only hides them from a plain
.BR "ls /mnt/pnfs" .
Hiding is an exact subtree-map match, so ordinary files and
directories are never affected.  Tools that enumerate the root
(e.g.\&
.BR find ,
.BR rsync )
will not descend into the hidden shards.
.SS "Logging"
The daemon routes diagnostics through a leveled, component-aware logger.
Output defaults to stderr at
.BR info ,
which reproduces the historical behaviour (every pre-existing
diagnostic is emitted at info or above).
.TP
.B log_file
.I path
(default empty \(em stderr).
Diagnostics output path.  A non-empty path is opened in
.B append
mode; if it cannot be opened the logger falls back to stderr.  Each
record carries a UTC timestamp, component, and level.
.TP
.B log_level
.I level
(default
.BR info ).
Global verbosity applied to every component.  One of
.BR fatal ", " error ", " warn ", " info ", " debug ", " trace
(case-insensitive).  A component emits a record only when its
configured level is at or above the record's severity.
.TP
.B log_level.<component>
.I level
Per-component override.
.I <component>
is one of
.BR mds ", " fsal ", " cluster ", " repl ", " cat ", " bpf ", " nfs
(case-insensitive).  Components without an override inherit
.BR log_level .
Example:
.RS 4
.nf
log_level.cat = debug
.fi
.RE
Unknown level or component tokens are warned about and ignored.
.SH EXAMPLES
A minimal 2-MDS lab config for
.IR mds1 :
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
mds_id = 1
hostname = mds1
nfs_port = 2049
grpc_port = 50051
cluster_size = 2
cluster_bind_addr = 10.0.0.101
cluster_peer[0] = 10.0.0.101
cluster_peer[1] = 10.0.0.102

ds_count = 2
ds[0] = 10.0.0.103:/export/ds
ds[1] = 10.0.0.104:/export/ds
ds_mount_path_fmt = /mnt/ds%u
ds_weight.0 = 0
ds_weight.1 = 0
ds_capacity_poll_ms = 60000

placement_policy = wrr
placement_policy_enabled = true
metrics_http_port = 9090
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/pnfs-mds/mds.conf
The file described by this page.
.TP
.I /etc/pnfs-mds/rondb.conf
RonDB connect string and schema name (referenced by
.IR catalogue_backend_conf ).
.SH HARDCODED CONSTANTS
The following knobs are compiled-in and are not yet exposed in this
file.  They can be promoted on request:
.IP \(bu 2
.B DS_HEALTH_DEFAULT_INTERVAL
(alias for
.IR ds_heartbeat_ms ).
.IP \(bu 2
.BR DS_HEALTH_COOLDOWN_BASE_MS ", "
.BR DS_HEALTH_COOLDOWN_CAP_MS ", "
.BR DS_HEALTH_FLAP_BACKOFF_MAX
\(em flap suppression.
.IP \(bu 2
.B DS_HEALTH_RECOVERY_MIN
\(em consecutive OK probes to mark ONLINE.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR DELEG_STRIPE_COUNT ", " DDT_STRIPE_COUNT
\(em striped-lock width.
.IP \(bu 2
Inode / dirent-cache shard width.
.IP \(bu 2
.B CB_MAX_MSG_SIZE
\(em callback XDR buffer size (4096 bytes).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pnfs-mds (8),
.BR mds-admin (8),
.BR nfs (5).
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2026 PeakAIO.  Licensed under MIT.  See
.B LICENSE-MIT
in the source distribution.
